# Read and Write MTGs

```@setup usepkg
using MultiScaleTreeGraph
file = joinpath(dirname(dirname(pathof(MultiScaleTreeGraph))),"test","files","simple_plant.mtg")
mtg = read_mtg(file)
```

## Read

### Reading a file

Reading an MTG is done using the [`read_mtg`](@ref) function:

```@example usepkg
file = joinpath(dirname(dirname(pathof(MultiScaleTreeGraph))),"test","files","simple_plant.mtg")

mtg = read_mtg(file)
```

The file given in input can be either a `.mtg`, `.csv`, `.xlsx` or `.xlsm` file.

### Options

The function has two optional arguments to set the type used for the attributes, and the type used for the MTG field (see next section for more details). It also has a keyword argument to choose the sheet name in case you're reading an `xlsx` or `xlsm` file.

#### Attributes type

The type used for the attributes should be a `NamedTuple`-alike or a `Dict`-alike type. Here is a more in-depth recommendation, use:

- `NamedTuple` if you don't plan to modify the attributes of the MTG, *e.g.* to use them for plotting or computing statistics...
- `MutableNamedTuple` if you plan to modify the attributes values but not adding new attributes very often, *e.g.* recompute an attribute value...
- `Dict` or similar (*e.g.* `OrderedDict`) if you plan to heavily modify the attributes, *e.g.* adding/removing attributes a lot

!!! note
    If you don't know what to use, just use the default.

#### MTG encoding type

The MTG encoding type can be either immutable or mutable. By default we use a mutable one ([`MutableNodeMTG`](@ref)), but you can use the immutable one by setting the `mtg_type` argument of the function to [`NodeMTG`](@ref). If you're planning on modifying the MTG encoding of some of your nodes, you should use [`MutableNodeMTG`](@ref), and if you don't want to modify anything, use [`NodeMTG`](@ref) instead as it should be faster.

!!! note
    Again, if you don't know what to use, use the default.

#### Sheet name

If you're reading your MTG from a `.xlsx` or `.xlsm` file, you can choose the sheet you want to read by using the keyword argument `sheet_name`.

If you don't provide anything for the sheet name, it will read the first one by default.

!!! note
    Keyword arguments must be explicitly named in the function call. In this case it would be:
    ```julia
    file = joinpath(dirname(dirname(pathof(MultiScaleTreeGraph))),"test","files","tree3h.xlsx")
    mtg = read_mtg(file, sheet_name = "A3H")
    ```

## Write

Writing an MTG back to disk is as simple as this:

```@example usepkg
temporary_file = tempname() # using a temporary file here, but you should put the path to the file you want to write

write_mtg(temporary_file, mtg)
```
